
Infects at any stage of the growth from the seedling to the grain formation stage
The infection appears in the nursery from second week of germination and spread quickly to entire nursery as well as to main field. Small brown circular to elongated spots appear on leaves which eventually develop into large elongated spindle shaped areas in the seedling stage. Young leaves dry completely in the nursery itself. The spindle shaped spots appear on leaves in the main field. Several spots coalesce and cause drying of foliage. Maximum damage is caused by the neck blast. The neck region turns black and shrinks. Infection occurs at the basal portions of the panicle branches including the fingers and the ear head breaks away from the stalk. The affected portions turn brown and ears become chaffy and only few shriveled grains are formed. Some of the fingers are also affected causing finger blast. The fingers become chaffy and only few shriveled grains are formed

Diseased seed are primary sources of blast inoculum that can infect the subsequent crop. Most finger millet growing communities use their own saved seed from the previousharvest. This should not pose any problem of loss of seedling vigor as finger millet is aself-pollinated crop. However, where there is no seed selection, the farmer’s seed may be contaminated with blast disease propagules. It is important to avoid contaminated seed by selecting ear heads that are free of disease; treating seed with a fungicide to kill disease  propagules. Where possible, farmers can purchase certified seed from reputable seed dealers.

Spray any one of the fungicides Carbendazim 500 g or Iprobenphos(IBP) @ 500 ml/ha. First spray immediately after noticing the symptoms. Second and third sprays at flowering stage at 15 days interval to control neck and finger infection. Foliar spray with Aureofungin sol 100 ppm at 50% earhead emergence followed by a second spray with Mancozeb 1000g/ha or Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 0.2% 10 days later

nill

