
Occur in nursery as well as main field.
Causes blight of seedlings.
Leaf spotting is very common.
Isolated brown, round to oval (resemble sesame seed).
Spots measures 0.5 to 2.0mm in breadth - coalesce to form large patches.
Seed also infected (black or brown spots on glumes spots are covered by olivaceous velvety growth).
Infection also occurs on panicle neck with brown colour appearance
50% yield reduction in severe cases.

As disease is seed borne,Use disease free seeds.
Removal of alternate & collateral hosts.
The use of resistant varieties is the most economical means of control.
Growing Resistant varieties like ADT 44,PY 4,CORH 1,CO 44,CAUVERY,BHAVANI,TPS 4 and Dhanu.
Providing proper nutrition for optimum plant growth and prevention of water stress seem to be the most important factors in controlling brown spot.
The disease is rarely observed in normally fertile rice soils.
Soils known to be low in plant-available silicon should be amended with calcium silicate slag before planting and the field should be well irrigated to avoid water stress.

seed soak / seed treatment with Captan or  Thiram at 2.0g /kg of seed.
Spray Mancozeb (2.0g/lit) or Edifenphos (1ml/lit) - 2 to 3 times at 10 - 15 day intervals.
Spray preferably during early hours or afternoon at flowering and post - flowering stages.
Seed treatment with Agrosan or Ceresan 2.5 g/kg seed to ward off seedling blight stage; Spraying copper fungicides to control secondary spread;
Grisepfulvin, nystatin, aureofungin, and similar antibiotics have been found effective in preventing primary seedling infection.
Seed treatment with captan, thiram, chitosan, carbendazim, or mancozeb has been found to reduce seedling infection. Seed treatment with tricyclazole followed by spraying of mancozeb + tricyclazole at tillering and late booting stages gave good control of the disease. Application of edifenphos, chitosan, iprodione, or carbendazim in the field is also advisable.

Seed treatment with Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 10g/kg of seed followed by seedling dip @ of 2.5 kg or products/ha dissolved in 100 litres and dipping for 30 minutes.
seed soak / seed treatment with Captan or  Thiram at 2.0g /kg of seed
Seed treatment with Agrosan or Ceresan 2.5 g/kg seed to ward off seedling blight stage;
Since the fungus is seed transmitted, a hot water seed treatment (53-54°C) for 10-12 minutes may be effective before sowing. This treatment controls primary infection at the seedling stage. Presoaking the seed in cold water for 8 hours increases effectivity of the treatment.
