
Rust can be readily recognized as orange red coloured pustules (uredinia) usually circular and ranges from 0.5 to 1.4 mm in diameter and appears on the lower leaflet surface. The epidermis ruptures and exposes powdery masses of reddish brown uredospores. Pustules first appear on the lower surface and in highly susceptible cultivars; the original pustules may be surrounded by colonies of secondary pustules. The rust pustules may also appear as small, necrotic, brown spots appear on the surface of the leaflet. They may be formed on all aerial plant parts apart from flowers and pegs. Late in the season, brown teliosori, as dark pustules appear among the necrotic patches. Severely infected leaves turn necrotic and desiccate but are attached to the plant. The disease is usually found when the plants are about 6 weeks old. In severe infection, lower leaves dry and drop prematurely which also leads to production of small shriveled seeds. 

Allow field to fallow for at least one month between successive peanut plantings; remove any volunteer peanut plants during fallowing to reduce inoculum. Avoid high humidity between the plants by widening the planting disease.

Spray chlorothalonil 0.2%; or mancozeb 0.25% or Hexaconazole/propaconazole to reduce disease incidence. Chlorothalonil 0.2% spray has been found effective against rust and late leaf spot, when sprayed 30 days after germination till 15 days before harvesting at regular 10-15 day intervals.However, suitable disease forecast system based on temperature, humidity, cloudy weather, and rainfall pattern if available is useful to save the fungicide and spraying costs.Calixin at 0.5 ml/liter of water or Kavach at 2 g/liter of water controls rust. Calixin is effective against rust but not against leaf spots.

Plant extracts of Salvia officinalis and Potentilla erecta have a protective effect on leaves against fungal growth. Other plant extracts such as flaxseed oil and peanut oil were also effective at reducing the incidence of the disease.

